.\"                                      Hey, EMACS: -*- nroff -*-
.TH GPOSTTL 1 "Jul 07, 2008"
.\" Please adjust this date whenever revising the manpage.
.SH NAME
GPoSTTL \- An enhanced version of Brill's Parts\-of\-Speech Tagger,
with built-in Tokenizer and Lemmatizer
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B gposttl [OPTION] [FILE or STDIN]
.SH DESCRIPTION
This is an enhanced version of Brill's rule-based
Parts\-of\-Speech Tagger, with built-in Tokenizer and
Lemmatizer. It reads from FILE or STDIN and writes to
STDOUT.  GPoSTTL is based on LPost package by Jimmy Lin
(jimmylin at umd.edu). LPost itself is based on Benjamin
Han's ePost package which is a cleaned-up version of Eric
Brill's original code. The lemma list is based on
e_lemma.txt (Ver.1), complied by Yasumasa Someya (someya at
someya-net.com).
.SH OPTIONS
.IP \-\-tree-tagger-mode(DEFAULT)
Output is written as "word	tag	lemma" format. In
this mode gposttl can be used as a drop\-in substitute for
TreeTagger which is a probabilistic Parts\-of\-Speech Tagger
developed by Helmut Schmid. Note: In this mode enhanced set
of Penn tagset are used to make its output compatible with
the output of TreeTagger. In particular, second letter of
the verb tags distinguishes between "be" verbs (B), "have"
verbs (H) and other verbs (V).
.IP \-\-brill-mode 
Output is written as "word/tag" format. In this mode
gposttl behaves like original Eric Brill's tagger.
.IP \-\-silent 
Suppresses non-essential console output. This option is not
honoured if there are errors.
.IP \-\-version
Prints version of the program.
.SH ENVIRONMENT
.IP GPOSTTL_DATA_DIR
The full pathname where alternate lexicon and rulefiles can be
found. It overrides default data directory.
.SH AUTHOR
Golam Mortuza Hossain <gmhossain at gmail dot com>
.SH "LICENSE"
.IX Header "LICENSE"
GPoSTTL is licensed under the same terms as
the license of original Brill tagger. See  
<http://gposttl.sourceforge.net/gposttl-license.txt>
for the terms.
.PP
Certain components of GPoSTTL such as Tokenizer and Lemmatizer which
are not part of original Brill Tagger can also be optionally
redistributed and/or modified under the terms of GPL. Please see the
specific files for exact details.
.SH "REPORTING BUGS"
Report bugs to Golam Mortuza Hossain <gmhossain at gmail dot com>
.SH "SEE ALSO"
.BR ePost (1),
.BR LPost (1),
.BR TreeTagger (1),
